The G. K. Warren Prize is awarded by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences "for noteworthy and distinguished accomplishment in fluviatile geology and closely related aspects of the geological sciences." Named in honor of Gouverneur Kemble Warren, it was first awarded in 1969 and has been awarded every four years since 1982. == List of G. K. Warren Prize winners == Source: NAS Year Recipient Rationale 1969 Ralph A. Bagnold for his outstanding contributions in fluvial geology 1973 Luna B. Leopold for his contributions to the field of hydraulic geometry of rivers and his studies of the riverine environment 1976 Walter B. Langbein for his significant advancement of hydrology and fluviatile geology through geophysics and mathematics 1982 John T. Hack for his major contributions to understanding of form and characteristics of river channels as related to geologic stratigraphy 1986 Stanley A. Schumm for his sound, insightful contributions to the role of fluvial processes in the evolution of slopes, stream channels, and sediment production, and their practical concerns to man 1990 John R. L. Allen for his distinguished contributions to fluvial sedimentology and paleogeomorphology, which skillfully blends field studies of modern and ancient fluvial environments with laboratory experiments and mathematical modeling 1994 Claudio Vita-Finzi for his distinguished contributions to fluvial morphology in relation to climate, tectonic activity, and human history (archaeological geology), on the basis of field investigations on several continents 1998 Thomas Dunne for his field observations as the basis for detailed theoretical analyses of many hydro-geomorphological problems, including surface erosion, snow-melt runoff, sediment budgets for small plots, and great rivers, including the Amazon 2002 Gary Parker for rigorous analysis based on fundamental physical principles and laboratory experiments markedly advancing our understanding of sediment transport, river morphology, and channel behavior 2006 Michael A. Church for his extensive and innovative field and laboratory studies of the morphology and dynamics of natural and managed river channels at a range of scales 2010 Alan D. Howard for his seminal contributions on the theory of fluvial erosion, sedimentation, and landscape evolution 2014 for his seminal studies on the role of fluvial incision as a key process that links climate, tectonics, and landscape evolution 2019 Kay Behrensmeyer For her contributions to understanding fluvial processes, how they are expressed in the rock record, and how they shape our understanding of ecological change throughout the history of life on land ==See also== * List of geology awards * Prizes named after people ==References== ==External links== *G.K. Warren Prize National Academy of Sciences web site Category:Geology awards Category:Awards established in 1969 Category:Awards of the United States National Academy of Sciences