Gopi K. Podila (September 14, 1957According to Zabasearch – February 12, 2010) was an Indian–American biologist who served as a professor at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. He was one of three faculty members killed in a mass shooting at the university on February 12, 2010. Podila was chairperson of the university's department of biological sciences, with a particular interest in the ecology of Populus and their mycorrhizal symbionts. ==Research career== He listed his research interests as "engineering tree biomass for bioenergy, functional genomics of plant-microbe interactions, plant molecular biology and biotechnology". In particular, Podila studied genes that regulate growth in fast growing trees, especially poplar and aspen. He has advocated prospective use of fast growing trees and grasses as an alternative to corn sources for producing ethanol.Trees And Grass May Be Able To Produce Ethanol Without Poisoning The Oceans. Energy Daily, January 22, 2008. Retrieved February 13, 2010. He was also the coordinator of an international consortium of institutions that has deciphered the genome of mycorrhizal fungus, a fungus whose symbiotic properties allow trees to generate large amounts of biomass.The Genome of an Important Symbiotic Fungus Has Been Sequenced. The first mycorrhizal fungal genome project was a success. Softpedia, August 9, 2006. Retrieved February 13, 2006. G. K. Podila received a B.Sc. degree from Nagarjuna University in India. He obtained a master's degree from Louisiana State University in 1983 and a PhD in molecular biology from Indiana State University in 1987.Handbook of molecular and cellular methods in biology and medicine. Taylor and Francis, 2002. Prior to joining the University of Alabama in Huntsville, he worked at Michigan Technological University from 1990 to 2002. Podila was an Editorial Board member of the journals Symbiosis,Editorial Board, Symbiosis. Retrieved February 13, 2010. New Phytologist,Editorial Board, New Phytologist. Retrieved February 13, 2010. Physiology and Molecular Biology of Plants,Editorial Board, Physiology and Molecular Biology of Plants, Springer-Verlag. Retrieved February 13, 2010. and Journal of Plant Interactions.Editorial Board, Journal of Plant Interactions. Retrieved February 13, 2010. At the time of his death Podila was a Councilor of the International Symbiosis Society.About ISS. International Symbiosis Society. Retrieved February 13, 2010. He is survived by his widow, Vani Podila, and two daughters. ==UAH shooting== On February 12, 2010, Amy Bishop, a faculty member in Podila's department, drew a handgun during a staff meeting and shot six people. Podila and two other faculty members were killed. Bishop was taken into custody outside the building and charged with capital murder. Bishop was convicted and sentenced to life in prison. ==Works== * * * ==References== ==External links== * (Archive) UAH. *G. K. Podila profile at ScientificCommons.org Category:1957 births Category:2010 deaths Category:Deaths by firearm in Alabama Category:Indian emigrants to the United States Category:20th-century Indian biologists Category:Indiana State University alumni Category:Louisiana State University alumni Category:University of Alabama in Huntsville faculty Category:People murdered in Alabama Category:Scientists from Andhra Pradesh Category:American biologists