G. Devasahayam was the Indian President of the Protestant Andhra Evangelical Lutheran Church Society and served during the periods 1956–1960 and again from 1963–1964. During his second stint as President of the AELC, Devasahayam participated1966 Yearbook, United Lutheran Church in America United Lutheran publication house, 1965, p.11. in the opening of the newly formed Andhra Christian Theological College then located in the same campus of the Lutheran Theological College in Rajahmundry. ==Studies== Gorikapudi Devasahayam completed his graduate studies at the Lutheran Theological College, Rajahmundry which at that time was directly affiliated to the Senate of Serampore College (University) and was assigned pastoral ministry. Later, Devasahayam was appointed to teach at his alma mater, the Lutheran Theological College in Rajahmundry.The Annual Report of the Foreign Missions of the United Lutheran Church in America for the Year, 1945, p.25. The AELC Society sent Devasahayam on study leave to the Lutheran Theological Seminary at Philadelphia during 1953–1954Minutes of the Annual Convention, 1955, p.86 where he studied during the period of the eminent human rights specialist, Frederick Nolde. The seminary awarded a postgraduate degree in Master of Sacred Theology (S.T.M.) upon Devasahayam in the succeeding convocation in 1955. ==Ecclesiastical ministry== Devasahayam began teaching at the Lutheran Theological College in Rajahmundry from 1944 onwards until his elevation to the Presidency of the Lutheran Society in 1956 and again in 1963 when Devasahayam proceeded to Guntur to take up the responsibilities of the Society. After his second stint as President ended in 1964,The Times of India Directory and Year Book Including Who's who, Bennett and Coleman, Calcutta, 1964, p.88. Devasahayam returned to Rajahmundry and joined the facultyProspectus ACTC, Printed by A. Nageswara Rao at Saraswathi Power Press, Rajahmundry, 1969, p.2. of the newly formed Andhra Christian Theological College, a Protestant Regional Theologiate that included the Anglicans, Baptists, Congregationalists, Lutherans, Methodists and Wesleyans. During the time as Professor in Rajahmundry, Devasahayam also served as a Pastor of St. Paul's Lutheran Church in Rajahmundry from 1947–1950.Martin Luther Dolbeer, The Andhra Evangelical Lutheran Church: A Brief History, 1951, p.77. ==Reminisce== Talathoti Punnaiah who studied a 3-year theology course leading to Bachelor of Theology at the Andhra Christian Theological College, both at Rajahmundry and at Hyderabad from 1970–1973 recalls his association with Devasahayam, ==References== ==Further reading== * * * * * * * Category:Indian Lutherans Category:Indian Christian theologians Category:Translators of the Bible into Telugu Category:Christian clergy from Andhra Pradesh Category:20th- century Indian translators Category:Senate of Serampore College (University) alumni Category:Academic staff of the Senate of Serampore College (University) Category:Living people Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:Indian Christians