thumb|150px|A wine glass and fruits on a table G. van Deynum (fl. 1650-1659) was a still life painter active in Antwerp in the 1650s. Only a dozen works by his hand have been identified to date. Van Deynum painted banquet style still lifes and vanitas still lifes.G. van Deynum at the Netherlands Institute for Art History ==Life == Nothing is known about the life of G. van Deynum. Only the first initial of his name is known. He is in some sources referred to as 'Guilliam van Deynum'.Sam Segal Publications on art He is believed to have been a member of the family of artists active in Antwerp, which included the miniaturists Jan Baptist and Abraham van Deynum.G. van Deynum, A peeled lemon, open peach, grapes and cherries, with a butterfly, on a partly-draped table at Christie's His activity in Antwerp in the 1650s is known from one work dated 1654. thumb|Still life with fruit and oysters G. van Deynum is sometimes confused with the artist Gerard (Gerrit) van Deynen who worked in The Hague and was possibly the father or brother of the still life painter Isaac van Duynen.Sam Segal, Guilliam van Deynum, A Wine Glass and Fruits on a Table at LorenzelliIsaac van Duynen at the Netherlands Institute for Art History He is sometimes also confused with the Flemish portrait painter Guilliam van Deynum.Francesco Rossi, Van Deynen, Guilliam in: Dictionnaire des peintres belges ==Work== Only about 10 to 15 works have been attributed to this artist. He mainly painted small still lifes of fruit and some pronkstillevens (sumptuous still lifes). A single vanitas still life has been attributed to him.G. van Deynum at the Netherlands Institute for Art History His work shows the influence of Jan Davidszoon de Heem, a Dutch still life painter who was active in Antwerp from the mid-1630s. Some of van Duynum's still lifes copied elements of compositions by de Heem from the late 1640s and early 1650s. Some of the works of van Deynum have been attributed to van Heem and have been falsely signed as de Heem. Some of his works have also been attributed to Gilliam Dandoy, another Flemish follower of de Heem working in Antwerp.Gilliam Dandoy at the Netherlands Institute for Art History The artist was particularly skilled at rendering surface textures and light effects.Deynum, G. van (auch Duynen, G. van), Stillleben mit Trauben, Zitronen und Auster at Dobiaschovsky thumb|Still life with a pipe and a tumbler ==References== ==External links== * Category:Flemish Baroque painters Category:Flemish still life painters