Guru Guruswamy is an American engineer working as Principal Scientist at Ames Research Center since 1988. He pioneered research in the area of computational aeroelasticity that involves Unsteady Aerodynamics, Finite Element Methods, Computational Fluid Dynamics, Parallel Computing and Problem Solving Environment. His innovative research was utilized in the first commercial 3-D computational aeroelasticity software developed by a major aerospace industry."XTRAN3S- Transonic Steady and Unsteady Aerodynamics for Aeroelastic Applications, Volume I -Technical Development Summary" AFWAL-TR-85-3124 (Vol I), January, 1986. The aeroelasticity legend Holt Ashley extensively referred to Guruswamy's research in his classical review paper."Role of Shocks in the "Sub-Transonic" Flutter Phenomenon", Journal of Aircraft, Vol. 17, No. 3 (1980), pp. 187-197. In 1988 he demonstrated the unique use of Transonic Small Perturbation based CFD for designing active controls to increase the safety of aircraft."Integrated Approach for Active Coupling of Structures and Fluids", AIAA Jl., Vol. 27, No. 6, June 89, pp. 788-793 It was followed by a break through development of Euler flow equations based Computational Aeroelasticy."Unsteady Aerodynamic and Aeroelastic Calculations for Wings Using Euler Equations", AIAA Jl., Vol. 28, No. 3, March 1990, pp. 461-469. It was cited by another Aeroelasticity legend John Dugundji of MIT as an important milestone in Aeroelasticity.John Dugundji 'Personal Perspective of Aeroelasticity During the Years 1953-1993' Journal of Aircraft, September, Vol. 40, No. 5 : pp. 809-812 https://doi.org/10.2514/2.6864 A google search shows about 150 researchers took advantage Guruswamy's work based on the Euler equations for follow-up developments. == Personal == As mentioned in the talk during symposium at IISc he was born in Bangalore and went to elementary school in a village Bidadi and middle school at SLN middle School in Bengaluru downtown. Completed his high school at National High School, Basavanagudi, under graduate in civil engineering with first rank from UVCE of Bangalore University and Masters in Structural Engineering with high distinction at IISc. He was the first under graduate degree holder in his family. Later obtained his PhD at Purdue in Aeronautical Engineering with 100% GPA. == Book chapters== Guruswamy authored a chapter on software in the popular text book on finite element analysis by Prof Henry T. Yang Chancellor of UC Santa Barbara. Finite Element Structural Analysis, Prentice Hall 1986 Self content computer source codes provide systematic learning tool for students. It is used as a text book at many universities including Stanford. A summary of his research for the last four decades is archived in the second edition of a monumental Handbook by McGraw Hill publisher.Standard Handbook for Aerospace Engineers, 2nd Edition Edited by Brij N. Agrawal and Max F. Platzer McGraw Hill, Feb 2018 It is the second edition after 4 decades. == Software in Computational Aeroelasticity== Guruswamy single-handedly developed the first Euler Navier–Stokes equations-based aeroelastic code ENSAERO that received NASA Space Act Award. He led a team of 10 scientist to develop a three level parallel aeroelastic software HiMAP (High Fidelity Multidisciplinary Process) to model fluid/structures/controls interactions by using Euler Navier–Stokes flow equations coupled with modal/finite-element structural equations. HiMAP received NASA software release award. Guruswamy's research Guruswamy, et al 'Transonic Aeroelastic Analysis of the B-1 Wing, Jl. of Aircraft, Vol. 23, No. 7 July 1986'Guruswamy, G. P., "Vortical Flow Computations on a Flexible Blended Wing-Body Configuration", AIAA Jl., Vol. 30, No. 10, October 1992 helped to design one of the world's most sophisticated aircraft that was displayed at a air show in his home town Bangalore. ==Parachute Research== Guruswamy has worked extensively in the field parachute simulation and has developed first-of-its kind high fidelity time accurate methods.Guruswamy, G.P., "Time-Accurate Coupling of Three- Degree-of-Freedom Parachute System with Navier–Stokes Equations," Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol. 54, No. 6, November–December 2017.Guruswamy, G.P., "Fast Database Generation for Parachute Cluster Design Using Navier- Stokes Equations on Supercomputers," J. of Spacecraft and Rockets, Vol 52, No 6 Nov-Dec 2015, pp1542-1550Guruswamy, G.P., Euler/Navier-Stokes-Based Unsteady Aerodynamics and Aeroelasticity of a Capsule Landing System, AIAA-2007-2063, 48th AIAA Structural Dynamics Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, April 2007 His work was related to Entry, Descent and Landing of Mars mission. Parachute was successfully used to land spacecraft on Mars. ==Helicopter Research== Guruswamy introduced a time accurate simulation procedure for helicopter aeroelasticity based on the Navier-Stokes and finite-element equations,Guruswamy, G.P., Computational-Fluid-Dynamics and Computational- Structural-Dynamics Based Time-Accurate Aeroelasticity of Helicopter Blades, Jl. of Aircraft, Vol. 47, No. 3, May–June 2010Guruswamy, G.P, "Time-Accurate Aeroelastic Computations of a Full Helicopter Model using the Navier-Stokes Equations," International Jl. of Aerospace Innovations, Vol. 5, No 3+4, Dec 2013 a break through improvement over previously used quasi-steady hybrid loose coupling methods. His research makes possible to simulate gust related transient conditions that may be faced by helicopters like Ingenuity (helicopter) in Mars atmosphere. ==Air Taxis and Drones== Guruswamy has pioneered research in the area of stability analysis of Urban air mobility vehicle including drones by using the high fidelity aerodynamic modeling. Demonstrated results for take-off of a air taxi and flutter of wing of an electric aircraft. ==Plays== Guruswamy founded an amateur Kannada drama troupe 'Chitra-Vichitra' in 1984 http://kknc.org/node/30#comment-13 in Silicon Valley He wrote and directed 5 dramas staged under the sponsorship of a cultural association Kannada Koota of Northern California KKNC He also played harmonium for drama. ==References== Category:Living people Category:Ames Research Center Category:20th-century American engineers Category:21st-century American engineers Category:Year of birth missing (living people)